OEP-32: Unique Identifier for Users (#103)
edx/open-edx-proposals: oeps/oep-0032-arch-unique-identifier-for-users.rst

###################################
OEP-32: Unique Identifier for Users
###################################

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75

   * - OEP
     - :doc:`OEP-32 <oep-0032-arch-unique-identifier-for-users>`
   * - Title
     - Unique Identifier for Users
   * - Last Modified
     - 2019-01-28
   * - Authors
     - Brian Wilson, Robert Raposa, Nimisha Asthagiri
   * - Arbiter
     - Olga Stroilova
   * - Status
     - Draft
   * - Type
     - Architecture
   * - Created
     - 2019-01-25
   * - `Review Period`
     - 2019-04-15 - 2019-04-29

Decision
========

We will use the *LMS user_id* to uniquely identify a user in the Open edX system. The *LMS user_id* is the ``id`` value of the user's row in the `Django auth_user`_ table in the Open edX LMS.

> The *LMS user_id* should be used for all internal and public events, REST APIs, and JavaScript APIs.

Author: Yes. This can be updated to ‘can’.

> The *LMS user_id* should be used for all internal and public events, REST APIs, and JavaScript APIs.

Author: @nasthagiri: I updated the language, but split out internal events, since that was made as a separate decision already.

       * Availability across all services is almost, but not yet complete.

       * Auto-incremented id allows for possible information leakage of auth_user table and ties us down to implementation of the housing database.
   * - email address
     - * Is PII and modifiable by the user.
   * - anonymous user_id
     - * anonymous (is not considered PII)

       * It is currently constructed by hashing the user's *LMS user_id* with the Django server's *SECRET_KEY* value. This value would change when the *SECRET_KEY* is rotated.

As noted above, the *LMS user_id* was selected for internal analytics events as the best match given the requirements. It continues to be the best match for the additional use cases of public events, REST APIs and JavaScript APIs.

Consequences
============

A consequence of the decision to use the *LMS user_id* as the unique user id is that some additional changes are needed to make the *LMS user_id* more globally available across all services:

* The `LMS OAuth Dispatch App`_ will now include the *LMS user_id* in the JWTs (JSON Web Tokens) used as part of the `Open edX Authentication`_ upon request.

> * Additionally, some further investment is required to make the *LMS user_id* available to all services for all users, like the Ecommerce Service.

Author: Yes. We are a lot further, but there is additional work that I think the Revenue team plans to pick up. At some point, we hope this will be resolved in all cases.

> * Additionally, some further investment is required to make the *LMS user_id* available to all services for all users, like the Ecommerce Service.

Author: Leaving for now.  We can update later when this is no longer needed.

Consequences
============

A consequence of the decision to use the *LMS user_id* as the unique user id is that some additional changes are needed to make the *LMS user_id* more globally available across all services:

* The `LMS OAuth Dispatch App`_ will now include the *LMS user_id* in the JWTs (JSON Web Tokens) used as part of the `Open edX Authentication`_ upon request.

* In order to keep the *LMS user_id* anonymous, there must not be any APIs or pages that _publicly_ expose the association between the *LMS user_id* and any of the user's PII (e.g. username and full name).

* Additionally, some further investment is required to make the *LMS user_id* available to all services for all users, like the Ecommerce Service.

This decision is also a simple acknowledgement of our tie to the database implementation and its auto-incremented value, given its already pervasive usage.

The *LMS user_id* is also considered a safe and anonymous option for third-party integrations as described above. One example of a third-party integration where the *LMS user_id* can now safely be used is in the `Realtime Events API`_, which has been updated with this clarification.

> Note: The legacy implementation of LTI uses what is called an "anonymous id", but is no more "anonymous" than the *LMS user_id* from a PII perspective.  It uses an id made of a combination of user id and course id, which makes it impossible for a third party system to build a user model in its own system across courses, and limits the capabilities a third-party system might offer a user. For future LTI implementations, this decision simply states that the *LMS user_id* is an option unless these additional limitations are a requirement of the integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The legacy implementations of LTI and the %%USER_ID%% keyword uses what is called an "anonymous id", but is no more "anonymous" than the *LMS user_id* from a PII perspective. They use an id made of a combination of user id and course id, which makes it impossible for a third party system to build a user model in its own system across courses, and limits the capabilities a third-party system might offer a user. For future LTI implementations, this decision simply states that the *LMS user_id* is an option unless these additional limitations are a requirement of the integration.
```

Reviewer 2: @robrap I agree with @pdpinch that the `%%USER_ID%%` is an additional example of a legacy feature that can be changed with future implementations, given the decision in this OEP.

One suggestion: to minimize the possible confusion, you can refer to `%%USER_ID%%` as an additional example (in a separate note) after this LTI note.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75

   * - OEP
     - :doc:`OEP-32 <oep-0032-arch-unique-identifier-for-users>`
   * - Title
     - Unique Identifier for Users
   * - Last Modified
     - 2019-01-28
   * - Authors
     - Brian Wilson, Robert Raposa, Nimisha Asthagiri
   * - Arbiter
     - Olga Stroilova
   * - Status
     - Draft
   * - Type
     - Architecture
   * - Created
     - 2019-01-25
   * - `Review Period`
     - 2019-01-28 - 2019-02-11

Decision
========

We will use the Open edX user_id (a.k.a. *LMS user_id*) to uniquely identify a user in the Open edX system. The *LMS user_id* is the **id** value of the user's row in the `Django auth_user`_ table in the Open edX LMS.

The *LMS user_id* should be used for all internal and public events, REST APIs, and JavaScript APIs.

.. _Django auth_user: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.0/topics/auth/default/#user-objects

Context
=======

In 2016, the analytics team wrote a decision to use the *LMS user_id* in `Using consistent user identifiers in Segment events`_.

In addition to needing a consistent user identifier for internal events, we also need one for public events, REST APIs and JavaScript APIs.

> .. _Using consistent user identifiers in Segment events: https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AN/pages/144441849/Using+consistent+user+identifiers+in+Segment+events

Reviewer: Is it possible to make this wiki page public?

Author: All necessary information exists in this OEP, so I killed the pointer to Confluence, since it pointed to other docs, and I didn't want to deal with all of that. :)

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 75

   * - Identifier
     - Limitations
   * - username
     - Username is considered PII.
   * - LMS user_id
     - Information leakage of auth_user table with easily guessable values; tied down to implementation of the housing database.
   * - email address
     - Is PII and modifiable by the user.
   * - anonymous user_id
     - It is currently constructed by hashing the user's LMS user_id with the Django server's *SECRET_KEY* value. This value will change when the *SECRET_KEY* is rotated.

       *Note*: Although this id was named the "anonymous user_id", it is no more anonymous than the "LMS user_id" from a PII perspective.

As noted above, the LMS user_id was selected for analytics as the best match given the requirements.

Drawbacks of the LMS user_id
----------------------------

As noted in the `User Identifier Candidate Comparison`_ above, using the LMS user_id has the following two drawbacks:

* Information leakage of auth_user table with easily guessable values.

* The id is tied down to implementation of the housing database.

Cost of an alternative to the LMS user_id
-----------------------------------------

> If we were to try to eliminate the drawbacks of using the auto-incremented LMS user_id as our unique identifier, an alternative might be to introduce a new id, like a UUID (Universally Unique IDentifier), that did not have the `Drawbacks of the LMS user_id`_.

Reviewer 3: What about sticking with the existing `user_id` column, but changing the insertion algorithm to generate a random user ID instead of a sequential one for new users? Obviously that wouldn't help existing users, but that would significantly reduce this drawback for new ones as well as new Open edX installations.

Author: Hi @bradenmacdonald. I had thought of this, but I was under the understanding that the column and all foreign-keys across the entire system would need to change size to binary(16). That doesn't seem small.  And it ignores the fact that you'd have additional questions about when and where to use the human readable form of the UUID, and other complications of dealing with proper indexing, etc.  Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: The column is currently a 32-bit integer. I agree that changing it to a 64-bit int or a 128-bit UUID would be prohibitively difficult (due to the foreign keys and the size of auth_user; you'd need to use pt-online-schema-change for the large tables and it would take ages).

However, what I'm suggesting is just keep the schema unchanged (ID remains a 32-bit integer) but when there's a new user, assign them a random 32-bit integer as their ID, rather than the next integer in the auto_increment sequence. (Plus some logic to deal with conflicts so insertions never fail).

Author: I see.  Nothing in this OEP prohibits this idea if someone wants to take that on.  The major disadvantage for UUIDs is a potential performance issue with the index because the values are not sorted.  There are solutions like [rearranging the time-related bits](https://mysqlserverteam.com/mysql-8-0-uuid-support/) in the MYSQL solution.  Someone would have to find the right way to make something like this work with 32-bits for it to ever work for edx.org.

I could acknowledge this idea, but I don't want to over explain it and I don't want to seem like anything is getting promised in this OEP along that front.

Author: @bradenmacdonald: I went for simple on the update, so I did not mention this.  As noted, I don't think the decision states anything against this possibility.

* The `LMS OAuth Dispatch App`_ will now include the *LMS user_id* in the JWTs (JSON Web Tokens) used as part of the `Open edX Authentication`_ upon request.

> * When exposing user information to other users, like in the case of a public Profile page, the associated *LMS user_id* should not be shared with other users.

Author: @nasthagiri: FYI: I added this warning text.  Not sure if it will do anything, but maybe it will help someone think about this somewhere it is needed.

Reviewer 4: Could you elaborate on the rationale for adding this warning text? It seems like one's *LMS user_id* is equally as sensitive their username, and, as such, should be considered essentially public.

Author: @kdmccormick: The `LMS user_id` is not considered PII, so it is not equally sensitive.  Given that, this note was updated and you can let me know if it is more clear.  Thanks.

Reviewer 4: Ah, I see. It's the _association_ that we don't want to make public. Makes sense.
